```
              ,---------------------------,
              |  /---------------------\  |
              | |                       | |
              | |     buetow.org        | |
              | |      personal         | |
              | |       capsule         | |
              | |                       | |
              |  \_____________________/  |
              |___________________________|
            ,---\_____     []     _______/------,
          /         /______________\           /|
        /___________________________________ /  | ___
        |                                   |   |    )
        |  _ _ _                 [-------]  |   |   (
        |  o o o TURBO           [-------]  |  /    _)_
        |__________________________________ |/     /  /
    /-------------------------------------/|      ( )/
  /-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/ /
/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/-/ /
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

## Why does this site look so old school?

If you reach this site via the modern web, please read this:


## Introduction

My name is Paul Buetow and this is my personal internet site. You can call me a Linux/*BSD enthusiast and hobbyist. Although I also have many other interests, you will encounter mostly (if not only) technical content on this site.

I have published some Open-Source software, you will find some reference to it on this site or on my GitHub page(s). I also read a lot of tech newsletters and blogs. I re-share the most interesting ones on my social media feeds. You can find links to my GitHub pages and to my social media accounts on my contact information page:

=> ./contact-information.gmi Contact information

I have also compiled a list of resources which made an impact on me:

=> ./resources.gmi List of resources

## Personal blog

English is not my mother tongue. So please ignore any errors you might encounter.

### Stay updated

=> ./gemfeed/atom.xml Subscribe to this blog's Atom feed
=> ./gemfeed/index.gmi Subscribe to this blog's Gemfeed

### Posts

I have switched blog software multiple times. I might be back filling some of the older articles here. So please don't wonder when suddenly very old posts appear here.

=> ./gemfeed/2021-04-24-welcome-to-the-geminispace.gmi 2021-04-24 Welcome to the Geminispace
=> ./gemfeed/2021-04-22-dtail-the-distributed-log-tail-program.gmi 2021-04-22 DTail - The distributed log tail program
=> ./gemfeed/2016-11-20-methods-in-c.gmi 2016-11-20 Methods in C
=> ./gemfeed/2016-05-22-spinning-up-my-own-authoritative-dns-servers.gmi 2016-05-22 Spinning up my own authoritative DNS servers
=> ./gemfeed/2016-04-16-offsite-backup-with-zfs-part2.gmi 2016-04-16 Offsite backup with ZFS (Part 2)
=> ./gemfeed/2016-04-03-offsite-backup-with-zfs.gmi 2016-04-03 Offsite backup with ZFS
=> ./gemfeed/2010-05-09-the-fype-programming-language.gmi 2010-05-09 The Fype Programming Language
=> ./gemfeed/2008-06-26-perl-poetry.gmi 2008-06-26 Perl Poetry
